---
date: ''
draft: false
title: 'Fundamental Concepts of Networking'
tags: ['all', 'infrastructure', 'networking']
---

## Fundamental Concepts of Networking

Just as interpersonal networking lays the bedrock for transactions and relationships in society, computer networking has enabled the world of technology to do what it does best: facilitate the free flow of information to anyone with the hunger to learn. The golden standard of five-nines of availability is 99.999% uptime, which equates to roughly five minutes a year—five minutes to run updates, perform upgrades, and recover from disasters. While redundancy and strategic planning are crucial in making this possible, it is a high bar, nonetheless.

Network devices that play a unique role in digital communication include modems, routers, switches, hubs, access points, media converters, and WAN links. The organization of such networks can be divided into logical and physical topologies. The logical topology represents the flow of data in the network, while the physical topology represents the location where each device resides.

The first topology introduced was a BUS topology, where devices are connected with a cable in a linear path functioning as a highway where all information on the network traverses. In contrast, the ring topology uses a cable in a circular configuration. To make this work, a token ring is logically passed to the devices in the network to prevent collisions. Two counter-rotating tokens, known as a FIDDI ring (fiber optic distribution ring), are used to provide redundancy in the network. The star topology is more commonly implemented, with a central device acting as a single point of failure. While all three have served and will continue to serve their role in computer networks, they all fall short when redundancy and high availability are a priority in a network.

In an effort to provide more redundancy, the hub and spoke topology consists of several overlapping stars where the spokes can connect. The king of redundancy in computer networking is the full-mesh topology. While this is also the most expensive to implement, it is fully redundant, allowing for a high degree of up-time even in the most devastating of circumstances. While it would be amazing to have the world connected by a full-mesh topology, a partial mesh topology remains a more reasonable approach, as it resides in the middle ground between a hub and spoke and a full-mesh topology. This provides enough redundancy to maintain business operations while being affordable enough for the businessmen and women of this world to rationalize.

The reach of a network provides another means of categorization. The Personal Area Network (PAN) is the smallest, reaching only a few meters. This is the network in use when using Bluetooth earbuds connected to a phone or a laptop. One step up from a PAN introduces the concept of a local area network (LAN), spanning the area of a building. One step further is a Campus Area Network (CAN), which reaches several buildings. As the name suggests, college and corporate campuses are prime examples of such networks in use. Next is a Metropolitan Area Network (MAN), which can span several campuses yet is still one step below a Wide Area Network (WAN). WANs have the largest scale, up to and including the internet in its entirety.

The communication between the devices in wireless networks can function in one of three modes: infrastructure, ad hoc, and mesh. Infrastructure mode uses a wireless access point as a centralized point for communication. All communication must pass through that node to arrive at its destination. Ad hoc mode decentralizes the wireless network, while a wireless mesh interconnects different kinds of nodes to increase redundancy and reliability. The kinds of nodes that can connect a mesh network can be microwave, radio, fiber, and copper, just to name a few.

Wireless is great. Less hassle, more flexibility, and straight-up convenience. While nearly all networks use wireless in some capacity, the networks that rely the most heavily on wireless technologies are IoT or Internet of Things devices. These devices can communicate over a few technologies, including IEEE 802.11, Bluetooth, RFID, NFC, IR, Z-Wave, and ANT+. Nearly all these technologies enable devices every one of us use daily. The abstraction between the technology and the usage is the only reason electronic technologies used for computation and communication have evolved past a hobby for the nerds of this world. Don’t get me wrong, it’s still a fun hobby, but nowadays, there are opportunities for it to be so much more.